Leadership & Management
Course No:-ICT. Ed. 444
Program: BICTE (4th Sem.)
Nature of course: Theoretical

Contents:

Unit I: Introduction to Educational Leadership

Unit II: Leadership theory and styles

Unit III: Communication and Interpersonal Skills

Unit IV: Decision Making and Problem Solving

Unit V: Motivation and Team Building

Unit VI: Change management and Social Responsibility

Instructional Techniques

Introductory presentation on each topic of the unit by the teacher

Use of lecture, question answer, discussion, brain storming and buzz
sessions for the theoretical contents.

Internal Evaluation (40 %)

Attendance – 5

Class participation – 5

First Assignment – 10

Second Assignment – 10

Third Assignment – 10

Final/Semester Evaluation (60 %)

Objective type of question (Multiple choice 10 x 1 = 10)

Short Answer Questions with two OR option ( 6 questions x 5=30)

Long answer questions with one OR option (2 questions x 10 = 20)

Chapter- 1

INTRODUCTION TO
EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP

Meaning of Leadership

Leadership is an important function of management. Organizational success
depends on the quality of leadership.

Leadership is the process of influencing the subordinates so that they work
hard in the achievement of group goals.

Leadership is guiding and influencing people to achieve goals willingly in a
given situation.

It is action oriented and it is about inspiring people.

According to Stephen Robbins, “Leadership is the ability to influence a group
toward the achievement of goals.”

According to Stoner, Freeman and Gilbert, “ Leadership is the process of
directing and influencing the task related activities of group members.”

Nature /Characteristics of Leadership

1. Process of interpersonal influence: Leadership is a process of interpersonal
influence. A leader influences the behaviour and activities of followers through
power, inspiration, reward, motivation and other tools.

2. Leaders and followers: There should be mutual relation between a leader and
followers. Followers are supposed to follow their leaders’ footsteps only by
getting inspiration from his conduct, ability and behaviour.

3. Common goals: Leadership aims at the pursuit of common goals, in other
words, a leader and followers must have common objectives. Leader directs and
guides the followers to gain planned objectives.

4. Continuous exercise: Leadership is a continuous managerial process
till the existence of an organization. The managers have to influence the
behaviour and performance of subordinates on a regular basis.
Whenever leadership becomes poor, the performance of employees turns
into a mere routine function and organizational effectiveness may
decrease.

5. Leadership is situational: The role of leadership assumes
significance in critical situations. It is the duty of the leader to inspire
subordinates to overcome the critical situation and help them to lead to
the destination in a successful way

Contd…

6. Rest on power: Leadership rests on power rather than formal authority. Here,
power focuses on the personal outstanding qualities and knowledge of the leader
through which he influences the followers.

7. Blend of inspiration, motivation and communication: Leadership is a blend of
inspiration, motivation and communication. It is the process of influencing the behavior
and performance of followers by inspiring them.

Meaning of Management

In simple sense, Management is composed of 3 words i.e. manage+ men + t

Manage = to manage, men= by men & t= tactfully

Management is the process of getting things done through others with the help of
basic activities like: planning, organizing, directing, co-ordinating and controlling.

It is a purposive activity of working others to achieve the organizational goals
effectively by managing organizational resources which are limited.

Management is a science and art of getting things done with and through others
which is done for the achievement of organizational goals effectively.

`

Leaders Born or Made

Trait Theory of Leadership

The trait approach to leadership is based on early research which assumes that a good leader is born and not
made. It is a modification of the great man theory which assumes that leadership qualities can be acquired.
The trait theory of leadership emphasizes that there are certain identifiable qualities that good leaders must
possess. Leadership qualities may be in-born or they may be acquired through higher education, training and
practice. Brief descriptions of some common traits that an effective leader should possess are as follows:

Achievement drive

Leadership motivation

Honesty and integrity

Self-confidence

Cognitive ability

Job related knowledge

Emotional Maturity

Creativity and originality

Traits of
Leadership

Achievement drive

Leadership motivation

Achievement drive

Honesty and integrity

Self-confidence

Contd…

i. Achievement drive: Leaders having such trait have clear vision about the objective of the
organization and procedures of achieving predetermined objectives.

ii. Leadership motivation: Leaders possess an intense desire to lead others to achieve
common goals.

iii. Honesty and integrity: Successful leaders are trustworthy, reliable, and open. They
build trustworthy relationship between themselves and with followers by showing true
behavior.

iv. Self-confidence: Leaders belief in own-self and their ideas and ability. They have
confidence for any kind of work they are doing.

v. Cognitive ability: Leaders are capable of exercising good judgment, strong analytical
abilities, and conceptually skilled.

vi. Job related knowledge: Leaders have technical knowledge on all the activities done in
the organization.

vii. Emotional Maturity: Leaders are well adjusted and never suffer from severe
psychological disorders. They are flexible and dynamic.

viii. Creativity and originality: A leader must be creative in generating new ideas,
concept, and knowledge for better performance of the organization.

ix. Organizing ability: A leader must have an organizing ability.

2. Behavioral Approach to Leadership

The failure of trait theory to identify the clear-cut set of traits has motivated researchers
to focus attention on leadership behavior. Behavioral theory attempts to describe what an
effective leader should perform in the day-to-day management. An effective leader is one
who performs those acts, and who supports groups to achieve objectives. The overall
goal of the behavioral approach is to identify and measure relevant leadership actions
and behavior that leads to enhance subordinates productivity and morale.

The Ohio State Studies: The Ohio State Studies A group of researchers at Ohio State
University conducted an extensive study of leadership behavior and effectiveness.

i.
Initiating structure:

ii.
Initiating Consideration:

Initiating Structure

Here, the leaders only give focus for completion to task.

Leaders give attention towards the goal achievement.

Task oriented

They believe employees as means to achieve production goals

Process = role ??

Followers = role??

Define structure of role/organize work

Considerations

Focus for job relation

Not focus for task/goal

Relationship between employees, feeling trust and respect

Give priority for employee satisfaction

If leaders are in high considerations then, they try to help and communicate
with workers.

Conclusions

Most theories in the 20th century argued that great leaders were born not made.

They believe that leadership is something called trait which it’s born genetically.

But current studies in 21st century indicated that the leadership is much more
complex.

Many scholars have told that leaders are made.

The best estimate offered by the research showed that only 1/3 of the leader were
born and there are the 2/3 of the leaders were made.

In the modern era, whereby the leadership characteristics is classified as soft skills. It
means that it can be learn and is acquired through a physical, psychological and practices.

For example: A person cannot be born with muscles, we all have to work towards it.

Mahatma Gandi’s parents weren’t leaders, he act as a leaders by himself.

Knowing the fact that leadership is mostly made is good for us because everyone can be
a leader.

21st Century Leader Vs Classical Leader

Traditional leadership relies on authority and control, while modern leadership emphasizes
collaboration and team work.

Traditional leaders may also be more focused on task-oriented goals, while modern leaders
may be more focused on people-oriented goals.

Traditional leaders may also be more autocratic, while modern leaders are more likely to use
motivational techniques.

Traditional leaders may be more likely to use formal power to influence others, while
modern leaders may be more likely to use informal power.

Modern leaders are typically more focused on achieving results than traditional leaders.

Modern leaders are often committed to continuous learning, both for themselves and for
their teams.

Modern leaders are more dynamic in nature as compared to traditional.
