Transformational Leadership (4 I’s )

Transformational leadership is the ability to inspire followers to change
expectations, perceptions and motivations to work towards common goals
through the leadership.
They act as inspirational motivators and have clear vision and values.

They work to win trust and respect of their followers through actions.

The leader works to establish a committed relationship between the leader and the follower.

Transformational leaders make people understand the need of change.

They create a sense of possibility and vision for the future.

Have a desire for common goals, not “me” but “us”

Act confidence and express confidence in followers.

Transformational leaders possess charismatic-leader characteristics(vision, theoretical skills, etc).

They motivate people by appealing to higher ideas and moral values, defining a vision of the future and forming
a base for credibility.

Mahatma Gandi, Abraham Lincoln, Nelson Mandela, etc. are denoted as Transformational Leaders.

Characteristics of Transformational Leadership

Encourage Creativity/Intellectual Inspirations

Individualized Considerations

Inspirational Motivations

Idealized Influence

Instructional Leadership (Coaching Leadership)

This leadership styles involves encouraging people to try something new on their own
instead of directly showing the ways of doing something.

Instructional leadership help people to see how their work fits into the overall big picture.

Such leader delegate challenging assignments. They use their self-awareness to create an
environment which encourages each person on the team.

Finally, the employees work autonomously and independently, they feel supported in
their work.

Characteristics of Instructional Leadership

Active Interaction

Partnership and collaboration

Continuous Improvement

Self effort

Challenging Assignments

Constructivist Leadership/ Entrepreneurial
Leadership

Entrepreneurial leadership may be defined as organizing a group of people to achieve a
common goal using proactive (focus for future) entrepreneurial behavior.

The leader does so by optimizing risk, innovating to take advantage of opportunities,
taking personal responsibility and managing change within a dynamic environment for the
benefit of organization.

Finally, this type of leadership is about facilitating the learning process, rather than
directing it.

Characteristics of Constructivist Leadership

Innovation

Motivation

Risk assessment

Proactive (focus for future)

High achievement desire

Passion (Focus to believe)

Strategic Leadership

Strategic leadership is the ability to influence others to voluntarily make
decisions that enhance the prospects for the organization’s long-term success.

Strategic leadership sets the firms direction by developing and communicating
vision of future.

A strategic leader is a change agent to initiate strategic changes in the
organization and ensure that the changes successfully implemented.

Strategic leadership is a practice in which executives, using different styles of
management, develop a vision for their organization which helps to adopt or
remain competitive in a changing environment.

The main objectives of strategic leadership are to streamline processes, boost
strategic productivity and promote innovation

Managers should have 5 leadership roles for the good strategy: (5 C’s)

Staying on the top of what is happening, closely monitoring progress and
learning about obstacles (credibility)

Promoting a culture (communication)

Alert for new opportunities (creativity)

Exercising ethical leadership (commitment)

Pushing corrective actions (confidence)

Characteristics of Strategic Leadership

Anticipating (expect or predict)

Challenging

Interpreting

Deciding

Learning

Agile and Digital Leadership

meaning of agile is that able to move quickly and easily.

Agile leadership is a leadership style that strives to remove roadblocks to
success so that employees can be more effective and productive.

Agile teams work together better, agile leadership drives better business
outcomes with less wasted time and resources.

Agile supports teamwork, customer, employee satisfaction and flexibility.

Traits of Agile Leadership

Agility

Awareness

Accountability

Adaptation

Agile Leadership Principles

Voluntary participation

Awareness of Intention

Build relationship

Integrate personal and business

Invite rather than expect

Share understanding

move assumption to agreements

Digital leadership

Digital leadership is the strategic use of a company’s digital assets to achieve
business goals.

Digital assets is anything that is stored digitally that the organizations can use
to realize value. For eg. Documents, audio, videos, logos, slide presentation,
spreadsheets and websites.

Digital leadership can be addressed at both organizational and individual
level.

In an organizational level within a specific marketplace, the digital leader
may be a company that successfully takes advantage of its own digital assets
to gain and maintain a competitive advantage.

Digital leaders are willing to explore how information technology(IT) can be
used to help an organization become more responsive to customer needs.

5 Pillars of Digital Leadership

Content

Technology

Design/user experience

Process

Organization
